# Naming Conventions

* **idiomatic**: Names that follow the naming conventions
* **non-idiomatic**: Names that are legal but do not follow the naming conventions
* **illegal**: Names that are either not allowed or are not syntactically correct.

## Legal vs. Idiomatic

* **Legal Names**  are syntactically valid and do not raise a syntax error.
* **Idiomatic Names**: are those that follow Python's style convention (PEP8).

Not every variable name that is **legal** is **idiomatic**.

```python
# Legal but non-idiomatic
firstName = "Ivan"
FirstName = "Ivan"
LASTName = "Hernandez"

# Legal and idiomatic
first_name = "Ivan"
MY_CONSTANT = 10
class MyClass():
	pass
```

## Illegal vs. non-idiomatic

* **Illegal names** are those that will raise a syntax error, either because is syntactically incorrect or is a Python's reserved word.
* **Non-idiomatic** names are legal names that do not follow the Python's style convention (PEP8)

Not every **non-idiomatic** name is **illegal**.

```python
# Illegal names
1stName = "Ivan"
first-name = "Ivan"
pass = "I will"
```

## Naming conventions for most identifiers:

* Use **snake_case**
* Names may contain: `(a-z)`, `(0,9)` and `(_)`
* Names should begin with a letter.
* When using multiple words, separate them with a single `(_)`
* Names may only use letters and digits from the standard ASCII character set. (Extended ASCII and Unicode letters and digits are allowed, but are non-idiomatic).

## Naming conventions for constants:

* Use **SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE** 
* Names may contain: `(A-Z)`, `(0-9)` and `(_)`
* Names should begin with a letter.
* When using multiple words, separate them with a single `(_)`
* Names may only use letters and digits from the standard ASCII character set. (Extended ASCII and Unicode letters and digits are allowed, but are non-idiomatic).

## Naming conventions for class names:

* Use **PascalCase** (also known as **CamelCase**)
* Names may contain uppercase and lowercase letters `(A-Z)`, `(a-z)` and `(0-9)`
* Names should begin with an uppercase letter
* When using multiple words, capitalize each word.

## Illegal Names

* Punctuation characters, most special characters, and whitespaces are not allowed
* Names must not begin with a digit
* Python reserved words are not allowed: `if`, `def`, `while`, `return`, and `pass`
