# Intro to Collections

## Collection Types

- Collections are objects that contain zero or more **member objects**, often called **elements**.
- There are 3 main categories of collection: sequences, maps, and sets.

| Type                | Class       | Category  | Kind          | Mutable |
| ------------------- | ----------- | --------- | ------------- | ------- |
| [ranges](10.ranges) | `range`     | sequences | Non-primitive | No      |
| tuples              | `tuple`     | sequences | Non-primitive | No      |
| lists               | `list`      | sequences | Non-primitive | **Yes** |
| dictionaries        | `dict`      | mappings  | Non-primitive | **Yes** |
| sets                | `set`       | sets      | Non-primitive | **Yes** |
| frozen sets         | `frozenset` | sets      | Non-primitive | No      |
## What are Sequences?

- Sequences are types that maintain an **ordered** collection of objects (also: elements or values) that can be **indexed** by whole numbers.
- Ordered collections are collections organized in some sequence: a first element, a second element, a third element, and so on. Indexed sequences associate every object member with a whole number (0, 1, 2, etc.) that can be used to access or modify that object. 
- Lists and tuples are **heterogeneous**; they may contain different kinds of objects, including other sequences.
- Ranges are **homogenous**; they always contain integers.
- Strings are a form of sequence called a **text sequence**. They differ from ordinary sequences in two main ways:
    - Strings are homogenous; all characters in a string are, um, characters.
    - Characters are not a distinct kind of object; they are merely strings of length 1.
    - A string's individual characters are not separate strings until you reference a character.
    - Strings are not actual collections since the characters inside the string aren't objects.

## What are Sets?

- Sets are types that maintain an **unordered** collection of unique objects (also called **elements** or **members**).
- Sets cannot be indexed.
- **Unordered** means no well-defined order exists for the objects in a set.
- There are two types of set types: sets (mutable) and frozen sets (immutable).
- Both are **heterogeneous**

## What are Mappings?

- Maps are types that maintain an **unordered** collection of **key/value** pairs (also called elements or members).
- Maps are accessed by their keys.
- Dictionary or `dict` type.
- Dicts are mutable.
- The keys in a dict must be unique.
- Keys must be "hashable" values (immutable): A hashable type is a type from which consistent hash values can be computed. A hash function takes an object and returns a hash value, which is used internally in a dictionary to store and retrieve values. Given two identical objects, the hash function must return the same value for both objects.
- Tuples can be used as dictionary keys since they are immutable. However, this only applies if all the elements inside the tuple are also immutable and hashable. For example, a tuple that contains lists cannot be used as a dictionary key since lists are mutable and non-hashable, making the entire tuple non-hashable as well.
- The values in each key/value pair may be any object.

## Sequence Constructors

- You can also use special functions called **constructors** to create new objects. In fact, sometimes you can't use literals; you must use constructors to create ranges, frozen sets, and empty sets.

### String Constructor

- `str()` and `str(Python object)`
```python
str()            # returns '' (empty string)
str('abc')       # returns 'abc'
str(42)          # returns '42'
str(3.141592)    # returns '3.141592'
str(False)       # returns 'False'
str(None)        # returns 'None'
str(range(3, 7)) # returns 'range(3, 7)'
str([1, 2, 3])   # returns '[1, 2, 3]'

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name

str(Person('May'))
# returns '<\_\_main\_\_.Person object at 0x...>'
```

### Range Constructor

It comes in 3 forms:

- `range(start, stop, step)`
    - This constructor generates a sequence of integers between start and stop - 1 with an increment of step between each consecutive integer.
    - You can use a negative step to generate a sequence in reverse order. In this case, the range ends at stop + 1. 

```python
r = range(5, 12, 2)
print(list(r))            # [5, 7, 9, 11]

r = range(12, 8, -1)
print(list(r))            # [12, 11, 10, 9]

r = range(12, 5, -2)
print(list(r))            # [12, 10, 8, 6]
```

- `range(start, stop)`

    - When you omit the step argument, Python uses a default value of 1. Hence, range(start, stop) is identical to range(start, stop, 1).

- `range(stop)`

    - When you omit the start argument, Python uses a default value of 0 for start. Hence, range(stop) is identical to range(0, stop, 1).

- Ranges are **lazy sequences**: they don't create any element values until your program needs them.

### The List, Tuple, Set, and Frozen Set Constructors

Lists, tuples, sets, and frozen sets share two common constructor forms:

- `list()` or `list(iterable)`
- `tuple()` or `tuple(iterable)`
- `set()` or `set(iterable)`
- `frozenset()` or `frozenset(iterable)`

- The constructors with no arguments create an empty list, tuple, set, or frozen set, as appropriate: a sequence or set with no members.
- The constructors that take an iterable argument expect an object that Python can iterate: an iterable. From the built-in types, the iterables include all sequences, text strings, sets, and maps.

```python
my_str = 'Python'

my_list = list(my_str)
print(my_list)  # ['P', 'y', 't', 'h', 'o', 'n']

my_tuple = tuple(my_list)
print(my_tuple) # ('P', 'y', 't', 'h', 'o', 'n')

my_set = set(my_tuple)
print(my_set)   # {'t', 'o', 'n', 'h', 'P', 'y'}
```
