# Expressions and Statements

- An **expression** produces a value that can be assigned to a variable, passed to a function or method, or returned by a function or a method.
- Examples of **expressions**:
	- Literals: `5`, `'Karl'`, `3.141592`, `True`, `None`
	- Variable references: `foo` or `name` when these variables have been previously defined.
	- Arithmetic operations: `x + y` or `a * b - 5`.
	- Comparison operations: `'x' == 'x'` or `'x' < 'y'`.
	- String operations: `'x' + 'y'` or `'x' * 32`.
	- Function calls: `print('Hello')` or `len('Python')`.
	- Any valid combination of the above that evaluates to a single object.
- A **statement** is an instruction that tells Python to perform an action. They don't return or produce values.
- Examples:
	- Assignment: like `x = 5`. This doesn't evaluate as a value; it assigns a value to a variable.
	- Control flow: such as `if`, `else`, `while`, `for`, and so on. These determine the flow of your program but don't evaluate as a value themselves.
	- Function and class definitions: using `def` or `class`.
	- Return statements: like `return x`, which tells a function to exit and return a value. `return` itself doesn't return a value; it informs the function what value it should return.
	- Import statements: such as `import math`.

Key differences:

- Expressions always return a value; statements do not.
- Expressions are often part of statements. For example, in the statement `y = x + 5`, here `x + 5` is an expression.
- Statements often represent bigger chunks of functionality like loops or conditionals; expressions deal with determining values.

Stand-alone expressions are both expressions and statements:

```python
3 + 4            # Simple expression
print('Hello')   # Function call; returns None
my_list.sort()   # Method call; returns None
```

**IMPORTANT**

```python
my_number = 3
```

The code snippet contains both a statement and an expression:

- `my_number = 3` is a statement that assigns the value `3` to the variable `my_number`.
- The value `3` itself is an expression. (Code appearing to the right of an `=` in an assignment or reassignment is an expression.)

### Expression Evaluation

- Python evaluates most expressions from left to right (when all operators are the same)
- When the operators are mixed, precedence rules are followed.
- Parentheses have the higher precedence.
