# Boolean vs. Truthiness

## Boolean values

- `True`
- `False`

These are Boolean objects that you can assign to variables, pass as arguments, and return from functions.

## Truthiness

* Is a concept that refers to how values evaluate in a Boolean context (conditional statements), regardless of whether they are actual Boolean values.
* Python can evaluate objects and values as either **truthy** or **falsy**.
- Truthiness arises in conditional expressions, such as `if` and `while` statements. Conditional expressions don't need to produce Boolean values. Instead, Python only needs to determine their truthiness. In an `if` statement, a conditional expression that evaluates as truthy causes the `if` block to execute. The `else` or `elif` block runs when the expression evaluates as falsy.

### Python's built-in **falsy** values:

- `False`
- all numeric `0` values (integers, floats, complex)
- `None`
- `''` or `""`
- empty collections: `[]`, `{}`, `()`, `set()`, `frozenset()` and `range(0)`
- Custom data types can also define additional falsy values.

## Python's **truthy** values:

- Anything that is not in the **falsy** list

### Truthiness and Short-Circuit Evaluation

- Logical operators don't always return `True` or `False`.
- They only care about the truthiness of their operands. 
- In each case, they evaluate as the object that evaluates last in the expression.

```python
print(3 and 'foo')   # last evaluated op: 'foo'
print('foo' and 3)   # last evaluated op: 3
print(0 and 'foo')   # last evaluated op: 0
print('foo' and 0)   # last evaluated op: 0

print(3 or 'foo')    # last evaluated op: 3
print('foo' or 3)    # last evaluated op: 'foo'
print(0 or 'foo')    # last evaluated op: 'foo'
print('foo' or 0)    # last evaluated op: 'foo'
print('' or 0)       # last evaluated op: 0
print(None or [])    # last evaluated op: []
```

