# Variables

## Definitions

- **Variables** are labels that identify particular objects in a program
- **Identifiers** refer to: 
	- Variable and constant names
	- Function and method names
	- Function and method parameter names
	- Class and module names

## Naming Conventions

- Names that follow the naming conventions are called **idiomatic**
- Names that do not follow the naming conventions are called **non-idiomatic**
- Names that are not allowed are called **illegal**

### Naming conventions for most identifiers (except constants and class names):

- Use **snake_case**.
- Names may contain: (`a-z`), (`0,9`) and (`_`).
- Names should begin with a letter.
- When using multiple words, separate them with a single (`_`).
- Names may only use letters and digits from the standard ASCII character set. (Extended ASCII and Unicode letters and digits are allowed, but are **non-idiomatic** )

### Naming conventions for Constant names:

- Use **SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE**.
- Names may contain: (`A-Z`), (`0,9`) and (`_`).
- Names should begin with a letter.
- When using multiple words, separate them with a single (`_`).
- Names may only use letters and digits from the standard ASCII character set. (Extended ASCII and Unicode letters and digits are allowed, but are **non-idiomatic** )

### Naming conventions for Class names:

- Use **PascalCase**, also called **CamelCase** .
- Names may contain uppercase and lowercase letters (`A-Z, a-z`) and digits (`0-9`).
- Names should begin with an uppercase letter.
- When using multiple words, capitalize each word.

### Illegal names:

- You may not use punctuation characters, most special characters, or whitespace.
- You may not start identifiers with a digit.
- You may not use Python's reserved words such as `if`, `def`, `while`, `return`, and `pass` as names.

## Creating and Reassigning Variables

- We create (**initialize**) a variable by simply giving it a value. That happens as part of an assignment statement:

```python
forename = 'Clare'            # initialization
```

- We can also give new values to variables by simply **reassigning** them:

```python
forename = 'Victor'           # reassignment
```

- Way to describe an assignment: The variable `foo`is assigned the value of `bar`.

## Creating Constants

- Constants are created (**initialized**) in the same way as variables: by giving them a value:

```python
PINING_FOR = 'fjords'         # initialization
```

- Constants should never be reassigned.
- Python does not support true constants. Instead, the **SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE** naming convention is solely for programmers.

## Augmented Assignment

- It's a shorthand notation also called **assignment operators**, of the process of taking the current value of a variable, perform an operation on the variable's value, and then reassign the variable to the newly computed value.
- **Augmented assignment** is a statement, not an expression. You can't use augmented assignment as a function argument or return value

```python
foo = 42            # foo is 42
foo -= 2            # foo is now 40
foo *= 3            # foo is now 120
foo += 5            # foo is now 125
foo //= 25          # foo is now 5
foo /= 2            # foo is now 2.5
foo **= 3           # foo is now 15.625
print(foo)          # prints 15.625

def foo(bar):
    print(bar)

a = 3
foo(a *= 2)
#     ^^
# SyntaxError: invalid syntax

def foo():
    a = 3
    return a *= 2
#            ^^
# SyntaxError: invalid syntax
```

## Reassignment vs. Mutation

- There are two ways to change things in Python:
	- Change the **binding** of the variable by making it reference a new object (**Reassignment**)
	- Change the value of the object assigned (**bound**) to the variable (**Mutation**).
- **Reassignment** makes the variable name refer to a different object somewhere else in memory.
- **Mutation** does not change which object the variable refers to, instead it changes the object itself. After mutating an object assigned to a specific variable, the variable continues to refer to the same object (albeit altered) at the same memory location.
- **Reassigning** an element of a mutable collection doesn't reassign the variable; it mutates the collection.

```python
num = 3               # assignment (initialization)
my_list = [1, 2, 3]   # assignment (initialization)
my_dict = {           # assignment (initialization)
    'a': 1,
    'b': 2,
}

num = 42              # Reassignment
my_list[1] = 42       # Reassignment of element,
                      # my_list is mutated!
my_dict['b'] = 3      # Reassignment of dict pair
                      # my_dict is mutated!

# You can still reassign the variables
my_list = [2, 3, 4]   # Reassignment
my_dict = { 'x': 0 }  # Reassignment
```

