# Flow Control

- **Flow Control** is the path that you want your data to take when writing programs.

## Conditionals

- Fork(s) in the road. Python evaluates the conditional and tells the data where to go.
- **Block** is one or more Python statements or expressions.
- `else` block isn't a proper statement; it's part of the `if` statement.
- You have as many `elif` blocks as you need. They are evaluated in the order they appear in the code.
- All statements in a block must be indented from the statement that begins the block. The indentation in a block must be consistent.
- Every once in a while, you may want to create a block in an `if` statement that does nothing. We usually do this for readability purposes. However, blocks can't be empty. Instead, you have to use a `pass` statement.

## Comparisons

- Comparison operators return a Boolean value: `True` or `False`.
- **Operands** are the expressions to the left and right of an operator.

### The **equality operator** (`==`)

- The **equality operator** returns `True` when the operands have equal values, `False` otherwise.
- In most cases, operands must have the same type and value to be equal. Thus, `5` is not equal to `'5'`. There are some places where you can mix types, however. For instance, integers and floats that are mathematically equivalent are usually, but not always, considered equal:

```python
print(5 == float(5))                # True

big_num = 12345678901234567
print(float(big_num) == big_num)    # False
```

- While `casefold` is only needed when working with non-US characters, it's best practice in Python to use `casefold` instead of `lower` or `upper`, especially when comparing strings. **(Check this with LSBot**).

### The **inequality operator** (`!=`)

- is `==`'s inverse: It returns `False` when `==` would return `True`, and `True` when `==` would return `False`. It returns `False` when the operands have the same type and value, `True` otherwise. Other than the return value, the behaviors of `==` and `!=` are identical.

### The **less than operator** (`<`) and **less than or equal to operator** (`<=`)

- The **less than operator** (`<`) returns `True` when the value of the left operand has a value that is less than the value on the right, `False` otherwise. The **less than or equal to operator** (`<=`) is similar, but it also returns `True` when the values are equal; `<` returns `False` when the operands are equal.
- Python compares strings character-by-character, moving from left to right. It looks for the first character that differs from its counterpart in the other string. Once it finds differing characters, it compares them to determine the relationship. If both strings are equal up to the shorter string's length, as in the last two examples, the shorter one is considered less than the longer one.

```python
print('42' < '402')       # False
print('42' < '420')       # True
print('420' < '42')       # False
```

### The **greater than operator** (`>`) and **greater than or equal to operator** (`>=`)

- The **greater than operator** (`>`) returns `True` when the value of the left operand has a value that is greater than the value on the right, `False` otherwise. The **greater than or equal to operator** (`>=`) is similar, but it also returns `True` when the values are equal; `>` returns `False` when the operands are equal.
- As with `<` and `<=`, you can compare strings with the `>` and `>=` operators; the rules are similar.

## Logical Operators

### `not`

- The **not operator** returns `True` when its operand is `False` and returns `False` when the operand is `True`. That is, it negates its operand.
- `not` takes a single operand; it appears to the operator's right. Operators that take only one operand are called **unary operators**. Operators that take two operands are **binary operators**.

### `and` and `or`

- The **and operator** returns `True` when both operands are `True`. It returns `False` when either operand is `False`.
- The **or operator** returns `True` when either operand is `True` and `False` when both operands are `False`.
- The following **truth** table shows how `True` and `False` interact with the `and` and `or` operators:

| **A**     |   **B**   |   **A and B** |   **A or B**  |
|-----------|-----------|---------------|---------------|
|   `True`  |   `True`  |   `True`      |   `True`      |
|   `True`  |   `False` |   `False`     |   `True`      |
|   `False` |   `True`  |   `False`     |   `True`      |
|   `False` |   `False` |   `False`     |   `False`     |

## Short Circuits

- The `and` and `or` operators use a mechanism called **short circuit evaluation** to evaluate their operands.
- When Python evaluates these operators, it stops as soon as it can determine the final result, without necessarily evaluating all parts of the expression.
- For the `and` operator:
	- If the first operand is `falsy`, Python returns that value immediately without evaluating the second operand.
	- If the first operand is `truthy`, Python evaluates and returns the second operand.
- For the `or` operator:
	- If the first operand is `truthy`, Python returns the value immediately without evaluating the second operand.
	- If the first operand is `falsy`, Python evaluates and returns the second operand.

## Truthiness

- Python can evaluate objects and values as either **truthy** or **falsy**.
- Truthiness arises in conditional expressions, such as `if` and `while` statements. Conditional expressions don't need to produce Boolean values. Instead, Python only needs to determine their truthiness. In an `if` statement, a conditional expression that evaluates as truthy causes the `if` block to execute. The `else` or `elif` block runs when the expression evaluates as falsy.
- Python's built-in **falsy** values are:
	- `False`, `None`
	- all numeric `0` values (integers, floats, complex)
	- empty strings: `''`
	- empty collections: `[]`, `()`, `{}`, `set()`, `frozenset()`, and `range(0)`
	- Custom data types can also define additional falsy value(s).
- what's truthy? _Everything_ else.

### Truthiness and Short-Circuit Evaluation

- Logical operators don't always return `True` or `False`.
- They only care about the truthiness of their operands. 
- In each case, they evaluate as the object that evaluates last in the expression.

```python
print(3 and 'foo')   # last evaluated op: 'foo'
print('foo' and 3)   # last evaluated op: 3
print(0 and 'foo')   # last evaluated op: 0
print('foo' and 0)   # last evaluated op: 0

print(3 or 'foo')    # last evaluated op: 3
print('foo' or 3)    # last evaluated op: 'foo'
print(0 or 'foo')    # last evaluated op: 'foo'
print('foo' or 0)    # last evaluated op: 'foo'
print('' or 0)       # last evaluated op: 0
print(None or [])    # last evaluated op: []
```

## Logical Operator Precedence

- `==`, `!=`, `<=`, `<`, `>`, `>=` - Comparison
- `not` - Logical NOT
- `and` - Logical AND
- `or` - Logical OR

## match/case Statement

- The `match` statement compares a single value against multiple values, whereas `if` statement can test multiple expressions with any condition.
- The statements in the `case _` block run when the expression doesn't match any other case blocks.
- If you want to match multiple values in a case, you can do so by using the | character to separate item values

```python
value = 5

match value:
    case 1 | 2 | 3 | 4:
        print('value is < 5')
    case 5 | 6:
        print('value is 5 or 6')
    case _: # default case
        print('value is not 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6')
# value is 5 or 6
```

## Ternary Expressions

- A ternary expression is a concise way to choose between two values based on some condition.
- They are often used as an expression on the right side of an assignment, as function arguments, and as function return values.

```python
value1 if condition else value2
```
- Python first evaluates the condition. If it's truthy, the expression returns value1. Otherwise, it returns value2. The return value is either value1 or value2, depending on which expression gets evaluated.


