# Type Coercion

## What is it?
'''Is when the value of an object is change from one type to another. It can be implicit and explicit.'''

## Types of Coercion
'''
- Implicit Coercion: is when Python does the coercion behind the scenes.

- Explicit coercion: is when we as programmer, intentionally change the type of an object by using, for example, one of the follopwing built-in functions: int(), float(), str(), bool().
'''

## Explain the different type coercions
'''
- Implicit Coercion:
    - String interpolation (f-strings): Whenever a value (object) is interpolated into an f-string, Python implicitly coerces the object into a string using the str() function.
    - When we do arithmetic operations using integers and floats. For example:

    x = 1
    y = 3.0
    result = x + y
    print(result) 4.0 => float

    - When we do arithmetic operations using Boolean values. Example:

    x = 1.0
    y = True
    result = x + y
    print(result) = 2.0

    - Truthiness: any value is coerced into a truthy / falsy value when evaluated in a boolean context (conditional statements)

    x = 'hello'
    if x:
        print(x)
    else:
        print(None)

- Explicit Coercion:
    - int():
        - any numerical string that represents an integer into an integer

        x = "1"
        x = int(x) -> 1

    - str(): Pretty much any value can be coerced into a String using this function.

    - float(): Any numeric string representation can be coerced into a float number
        x = "1"
        floatn = float(x)
        print(floatn) 1.0

        Similar as int(), if the type of the argument is other than a number or a string, it will raise a TypeError exception

    - bool(): This converts any value to a boolean representation.
        x = "abc"
        print(bool(x)) = True 

        y = 0
        print(bool(y)) = False
''' 

## Exceptions in a coercion context
'''
    - int():
        - TypeError:
        x = [1, 2, 3]
        integer = int(x) => TypeError exception 
        - ValueError:
        x = "3.1415"
        y = 'abc'
        integer = int(x) = ValueError
        integer2 = int(y) = ValueError

    - float():
        -  TypeError:
            x = [1, 2, 3]
            floatn = float(x) => TypeError exception
        - ValueError
            x = 'abc'
            floatn = float(x) => raise exception


'''

## How to check the type of an object
'''
    - type(): Allows to check the types of any object
    x = 1
    print(type(x)) = class <int>
    print(type(x)__name__) = int 

    - To check if an object is of a specific type:
        x = 1
        print(type(x) is int)
        print(isinstance(x, int))
'''

## Looks like coercion, smells like coercion, ... but it is not.
'''
print()
''' 

## Special Cases
'''
 - NaN (Not a Number) = represents missing value (operations without meaningful result)
 - Infinity = 'inf'

'''
## str() vs repr()
'''
    - str(): displays the object value in a string format, that is easy to read and understand by humans
    - repr(): returns a string object that can be use to recreate the same object.
    x = "abc"
    print(x) = abc
    print(repr(x)) = 'abc'
'''

x = 'global'

def outer_function():
    global x 
    x = "local"
        
    def inner_function():
        print(x)
            
    inner_function()
        
outer_function()

def greet(name):
      greeting = "Hello, " + name + "!"
      return greeting

name = "Sarah"
greeting = greet(name)
greeting = "Hi there!"
print(greeting)  # Expected output: "Hello, Sarah!"

text = 'Hello! I am Eloise.'

def swap(s):
    for char in s:
        s.replace(char, char.upper())
    return s

print(swap(text)) 
print(text)